README.md, before:

# gbxutils

Utilities for examining and manipulating Trackmania Nations Forever maps.

The main purpose of this project is to provide a set of Javascript functions so
that you can write your own scripts to select a group of blocks in your map and
either delete them from the map or transform and paste copies. Here is a
[guide to writing scripts](ScriptGuide.md).

## Working tools

These are in the `bin` folder and should be run with
[node.js](https://nodejs.org/). Be careful not to clobber your input files with
outputs. This project is still very new and likely to be buggy.

### gbxtojson.js

`node bin/gbxtojson.js SomeChallengeFile.Gbx OutputFilename.json`

(In Windows you can use backslashes instead of forward slashes.)

Loads a Trackmania map/challenge file and outputs a json representation. This
tool is still incomplete and does not recognise all chunk types yet, but enough
for it to work on some TMNF maps (with no MediaTracker). When it encounters a
chunk it doesn't recognise it will stop with an error, but it will still try to
save what it's parsed so far.

### gbxurls.js

```
node bin/gbxurls.js Input.Gbx
node bin/gbxurls.js Input.Gbx Output.Gbx 'pattern' 'replacement'
node bin/gbxurls.js Input.Gbx Output.Gbx 'pattern' 'replacement' 'flags'
```

The first command lists dependency URLs found in Input.Gbx. The other versions
replace matching patterns in the URLs. `pattern` and `replacement` should be
[Javascript RegExp](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Regular_Expressions)
strings. If you don't understand regular expressions, simple text should
suffice. For example, if your files have moved to a different server address,
but the path names are the same, you could use:

```
node bin/gbxurls.js Input.Gbx Output.Gbx old.example.com new.example.com
```

The most useful flags are 'i' to ignore case during pattern matching (so 'a'
matches 'a' or 'A' etc) and 'g' to replace all occurrences of matching patterns
in one string. The default behaviour is to replace only the first match. Note
this applies to one URL string at a time. You can use both flags at once by
typing 'ig' or 'gi'.

This tool passes the file body straight through without parsing it, so it does
not suffer the limitations of most of the other tools.

### gbxdelcps.js

```
node bin/gbxdelcps.js Input.Gbx Output.Gbx
```

Deletes all checkpoints. Most types of checkpoint are replaced by the nearest
equivalent non-checkpoint block. Rings and grass checkpoints are just deleted
because they have no real equivalent. Note that "StadiumGrassCheckpoints" may
also appear on flat dirt (not dirt roads) and the blue floor that replaces
grass under fabric roofs. If you encounter issues with "clip" blocks after
removing checkpoints, please report an issue.

If you're wondering what this is useful for, it's to make it easy to record
MT ghosts without having to drive the entire map. You will still have to
manually move/place start and finish blocks to suit though.

This code also provides an example of how you can use a selection filter
function to do something more advanced than simply choose which blocks to
select.

### tm2tonf.js

This is not very useful at the moment. It tries to convert TM2 Stadium maps to
TMNF format, but currently has problems parsing the body of TM2 files. If I
limit it to only changing the header, TMNF can still not load the resulting
files.

### gbxident.js

```
node bin/gbxident.js Input.Gbx Output.Gbx
```

This just loads a map, decodes it into Javascript objects, then re-encodes and
saves it. It's mainly for testing that the decoding and encoding works
correctly.

## Goal

The main aim is to allow large scale copy, transform and paste operations in
Trackmania Nations Forever maps. There are two possible ways this project can
achieve that, but I don't know which one (or both) will be implemented.

1. Provide a library to make it easy to write scripts that select and
   manipulate blocks flexibly. This should be the more flexible solution, but
   more difficult for muggles to use.

2. TMNF maps can be imported into Trackmania 2 Stadium, which has a much more
   powerful editor, including copy, transform & paste. However, after a map has
   been saved by TM2 it can't be loaded back into TMNF. This project may be
   able to provide a tool to convert TM2 maps back into TMNF format, as long as
   no new or custom blocks have been added.

## Status

The code can now fully parse basic TMNF maps, but runs into problems when I try
to load a TMNF map with lots of MediaTracker (MT), or a (basic) TM2 map. I
can't afford to spend a lot of time debugging it, so it is unlikely that I will
achieve goal 2 and I've concentrated on achieving goal 1.

This also means that if you want to use these tools, I recommend that you plan
to do so before adding MT. Note, "MT" does not include custom pictures on signs
etc. These should be OK. gbxurls.js should also work on any map, because it
does not need to parse the body.

## Technical details

The code is written in Javascript and should be run with
[node.js](https://nodejs.org/) (used to be gjs, but that's rather awkward for
MS Windows users). It doesn't need to be installed with npm, it can simply be
run in place.

## minilzo and sax-js

`lib/lzo1x.js` and `lib/sax.js` are not my own work. I copied them from
[minilzo-js](https://github.com/abraidwood/minilzo-js) and
[sax-js](https://github.com/isaacs/sax-js) respectively and simply added
export directives. Refer to those files or projects for their licence details.

Commit message:

Documented that gbxurls.js might be ineffective

README.md, after:

# gbxutils

Utilities for examining and manipulating Trackmania Nations Forever maps.

The main purpose of this project is to provide a set of Javascript functions so
that you can write your own scripts to select a group of blocks in your map and
either delete them from the map or transform and paste copies. Here is a
[guide to writing scripts](ScriptGuide.md).

## Working tools

These are in the `bin` folder and should be run with
[node.js](https://nodejs.org/). Be careful not to clobber your input files with
outputs. This project is still very new and likely to be buggy.

### gbxtojson.js

`node bin/gbxtojson.js SomeChallengeFile.Gbx OutputFilename.json`

(In Windows you can use backslashes instead of forward slashes.)

Loads a Trackmania map/challenge file and outputs a json representation. This
tool is still incomplete and does not recognise all chunk types yet, but enough
for it to work on some TMNF maps (with no MediaTracker). When it encounters a
chunk it doesn't recognise it will stop with an error, but it will still try to
save what it's parsed so far.

### gbxurls.js

```
node bin/gbxurls.js Input.Gbx
node bin/gbxurls.js Input.Gbx Output.Gbx 'pattern' 'replacement'
node bin/gbxurls.js Input.Gbx Output.Gbx 'pattern' 'replacement' 'flags'
```

The first command lists dependency URLs found in Input.Gbx. The other versions
replace matching patterns in the URLs. `pattern` and `replacement` should be
[Javascript RegExp](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Regular_Expressions)
strings. If you don't understand regular expressions, simple text should
suffice. For example, if your files have moved to a different server address,
but the path names are the same, you could use:

```
node bin/gbxurls.js Input.Gbx Output.Gbx old.example.com new.example.com
```

The most useful flags are 'i' to ignore case during pattern matching (so 'a'
matches 'a' or 'A' etc) and 'g' to replace all occurrences of matching patterns
in one string. The default behaviour is to replace only the first match. Note
this applies to one URL string at a time. You can use both flags at once by
typing 'ig' or 'gi'.

This tool passes the file body straight through without parsing it, so it does
not suffer the limitations of most of the other tools. However, this means it
might be ineffective, because URLs appear to be stored in the body as well as
in the header.

### gbxdelcps.js

```
node bin/gbxdelcps.js Input.Gbx Output.Gbx
```

Deletes all checkpoints. Most types of checkpoint are replaced by the nearest
equivalent non-checkpoint block. Rings and grass checkpoints are just deleted
because they have no real equivalent. Note that "StadiumGrassCheckpoints" may
also appear on flat dirt (not dirt roads) and the blue floor that replaces
grass under fabric roofs. If you encounter issues with "clip" blocks after
removing checkpoints, please report an issue.

If you're wondering what this is useful for, it's to make it easy to record
MT ghosts without having to drive the entire map. You will still have to
manually move/place start and finish blocks to suit though.

This code also provides an example of how you can use a selection filter
function to do something more advanced than simply choose which blocks to
select.

### tm2tonf.js

This is not very useful at the moment. It tries to convert TM2 Stadium maps to
TMNF format, but currently has problems parsing the body of TM2 files. If I
limit it to only changing the header, TMNF can still not load the resulting
files.

### gbxident.js

```
node bin/gbxident.js Input.Gbx Output.Gbx
```

This just loads a map, decodes it into Javascript objects, then re-encodes and
saves it. It's mainly for testing that the decoding and encoding works
correctly.

## Goal

The main aim is to allow large scale copy, transform and paste operations in
Trackmania Nations Forever maps. There are two possible ways this project can
achieve that, but I don't know which one (or both) will be implemented.

1. Provide a library to make it easy to write scripts that select and
   manipulate blocks flexibly. This should be the more flexible solution, but
   more difficult for muggles to use.

2. TMNF maps can be imported into Trackmania 2 Stadium, which has a much more
   powerful editor, including copy, transform & paste. However, after a map has
   been saved by TM2 it can't be loaded back into TMNF. This project may be
   able to provide a tool to convert TM2 maps back into TMNF format, as long as
   no new or custom blocks have been added.

## Status

The code can now fully parse basic TMNF maps, but runs into problems when I try
to load a TMNF map with lots of MediaTracker (MT), or a (basic) TM2 map. I
can't afford to spend a lot of time debugging it, so it is unlikely that I will
achieve goal 2 and I've concentrated on achieving goal 1.

This also means that if you want to use these tools, I recommend that you plan
to do so before adding MT. Note, "MT" does not include custom pictures on signs
etc. These should be OK. gbxurls.js should also work on any map, because it
does not need to parse the body.

## Technical details

The code is written in Javascript and should be run with
[node.js](https://nodejs.org/) (used to be gjs, but that's rather awkward for
MS Windows users). It doesn't need to be installed with npm, it can simply be
run in place.

## minilzo and sax-js

`lib/lzo1x.js` and `lib/sax.js` are not my own work. I copied them from
[minilzo-js](https://github.com/abraidwood/minilzo-js) and
[sax-js](https://github.com/isaacs/sax-js) respectively and simply added
export directives. Refer to those files or projects for their licence details.
